prāta: santrastabhojakṣitipativacasā prastute mallatūrye
saṅghe rājñāṃ ca mañcānabhiyayuṣi gate nandagope'pi harmyam |
kaṃse saudhādhirūḍhe tvamapi sahabala: sānugaścāruveṣo
raṅgadvāraṃ gato'bhū: kupitakuvalayāpīḍanāgāvalīḍham ||1||
prāta:	early next morning
santrasta-bhoja-	at the frightened Kansa
kṣitipati-vacasā	king's command
prastute malla-tūrye	was commenced the wrestling by the beating of the drums
saṅghe rājñāṃ ca	and the assembly of kings
mañcān-abhiyayuṣi	to their seats had ascended
gate nandagope-	Nandagopa had gone
api harmyam	also to the palace
kaṃse-saudha-adhirūḍhe	and Kansa had climbed to the top balcony of his palace
tvam-api saha-bala:	Thou also along with Balaraam
sānuga:-cāru-veṣa:	and with friends, attractively dressed
raṅga-dvāraṃ gata:-abhū:	to the gate of the arena went (which was)
kupita-kuvalayāpīḍa-	by the angered Kuvalayaapeeda
nāga-avalīḍham	the elephant obstructed
Early the next morning, the frightened king Kansa commanded the commencement of the wrestling by the beating of the drums. The assembly of the kings ascended their respective seats to witness the wrestling. Nandagopa had also gone to the palace, and Kansa had also climbed to the top balcony of his palace. Thou along with Balaraama and Thy friends, dressed attractively approached the gates of the arena which was obstructed by the angered great elephant Kuvalayaapeeda.
pāpiṣṭhāpehi mārgāddrutamiti vacasā niṣṭhurakruddhabuddhe-
rambaṣṭhasya praṇodādadhikajavajuṣā hastinā gṛhyamāṇa: |
kelīmukto'tha gopīkucakalaśaciraspardhinaṃ kumbhamasya
vyāhatyālīyathāstvaṃ caraṇabhuvi punarnirgato valguhāsī ||2||
pāpiṣṭha-apehi	O wicked one, move away
mārgāt-drutam-	from the way quickly
iti vacasā	thus saying
niṣṭhura-kruddha-buddhe-	the cruel and angry minded
ambaṣṭhasya praṇodāt-	mahout's prompting
adhika-java-juṣā	more speed taking
hastinā gṛhyamāṇa:	by the elephant (Thou) being caught
kelī-mukta:-atha	playfully releasing Thyself, then
gopī-kuca-kalaśa-	the Gopikas' pot like breasts
cira-spardhinaṃ	who was always competing
kumbham-asya vyāhatya-	on this (elephant's) forehead striking a blow
alīyathā:-tvaṃ	hid Thou
caraṇa-bhuvi	between its (elephant's) legs
puna:-nirgata:	(Thou) again came out
valgu-hāsī	sweetly smiling
Thou said 'O wicked one move away from the way quickly'. At this the cruel and angry minded mahout prompted the elephant, who taking great speed caught Thee in its tusks. As though in play Thou released Thyself and struck a blow on the elephant's bulging forehead which rivalled with the Gopikas' pot like breasts. Thou then hid between the elephant's legs for sometime and then came out smiling sweetly.
hastaprāpyo'pyagamyo jhaṭiti munijanasyeva dhāvan gajendraṃ
krīḍannāpātya bhūmau punarabhipatatastasya dantaṃ sajīvam |
mūlādunmūlya tanmūlagamahitamahāmauktikānyātmamitre
prādāstvaṃ hāramebhirlalitaviracitaṃ rādhikāyai diśeti ||3||
hasta-prāpya:-api-	in the hands grasped also
agamya: jhaṭiti	unattainable hastily
munijanasya-	of the sages
iva dhāvan	in the same manner, the running
gajendraṃ krīḍan-	elephant playfully
āpātya bhūmau	throwing down on the ground
puna:-abhipatata:-tasya	again when charging he was
dantaṃ sajīvam	the tooth, live
mūlāt-unmūlya	from its roots pulling out
tat-mūlaga-	off its (the tusks') root
mahita-mahā-	priceless large
mauktikāni-	pearls
ātma-mitre	to Thy friend
prādā:-tvam	Thou gave (saying)
hāram-ebhi:-	necklace with these
lalita-viracitaṃ	beautifully made
rādhikāyai	to Raadhaa
diśa-iti	give, thus
To the sages who meditate, just as Thou seem to be in their grasp but suddenly elude them, so also Thou escaped even when Thou were in the grasp of the elephant, running away just when it seemed to catch hold of Thee. Thou then playfully threw him on the ground. As he again rushed towards Thee, Thou pulled out its tooth from the root of its tusk. From there emerged priceless large pearls which Thou gave to Thy friend asking him to get them made into a beautiful necklace and give it to Raadhaa.
gṛhṇānaṃ dantamaṃse yutamatha halinā raṅgamaṅgāviśantaṃ
tvāṃ maṅgalyāṅgabhaṅgīrabhasahṛtamanolocanā vīkṣya lokā: |
haṃho dhanyo hi nando nahi nahi paśupālāṅganā no yaśodā
no no dhanyekṣaṇā: smastrijagati vayameveti sarve śaśaṃsu: ||4||
gṛhṇānaṃ dantam-aṃse	carrying the tusk on the shoulder
yutam-atha halinā	with Balaraam then
raṅgam-aṅga-	the arena, O Lord!
āviśantam	entering
tvāṃ maṅgalya-aṅga-bhaṅgī-	Thee with auspicious beautiful form
rabhasa-hṛta-mana:-locanā	forcefully drawing the mind and eyes
vīkṣya lokā:	seeing, the people (exclaimed)
haṃho dhanya hi nanda:	Oh! Fortunate indeed is Nanda
nahi nahi paśupāla-aṅganā	no no the Gopa women
no yaśodā	no Yashodaa
no no dhanya-īkṣaṇā: sma:-	no no fortunate are we the onlookers
trijagati	in the three worlds
vayam-eva-iti	we alone (are fortunate) thus
sarve śaśaṃsu:	everyone declared
O Lord! Carrying the tusk on the shoulder, as Thou entered the arena with Balaraama, everyone's eyes and minds were forcefully drawn towards Thy auspicious form.The people exclaimed 'O fortunate indeed is Nanda, no no the Gopikaas, no Yashodaa, no no we the onlookers are fortunate, we alone are fortunate indeed in the three worlds.' Thus everyone declared.
pūrṇaṃ brahmaiva sākṣānniravadhi paramānandasāndraprakāśaṃ
gopeśu tvaṃ vyalāsīrna khalu bahujanaistāvadāvedito'bhū: |
dṛṣṭvā'tha tvāṃ tadedaṃprathamamupagate puṇyakāle janaughā:
pūrṇānandā vipāpā: sarasamabhijagustvatkṛtāni smṛtāni ||5||
pūrṇaṃ brahma-eva	The Complete Brahman Itself That Thou are
sākṣāt-niravadhi	right in front, free from all limitations
parama-ānanda-sāndra-prakāśaṃ	of the nature of supreme bliss and pure consciousness
gopeṣu tvaṃ vyalāsī:-	among the Gopas Thou shone
na khalu bahu-janai:-	not indeed by many people
tāvat-āvideta:-abhū:	then (Thou) were known (as Brahamn)
dṛṣṭvā-atha tvāṃ	then seeing Thee
tat-idam-prathamam-	that this for the first time
upagate puṇyakāle	arising of the auspicious time
jana-aughā:	hordes of people
pūrṇānandā vipāpā:	full of bliss, becoming free from sin
sarasam-abhijagu:-	joyfully narrated
tvat-kṛtāni smṛtāni	Thy deeds, which they remembered
Not many people had the knowledge that Thou who shone and lived among the Gopas were Brahman incarnate and the essence of Supreme Bliss and Pure consciousness, free from all limitations. For many of them the auspicious time had arisen that they saw Thee for the first time and were full of bliss and became free from sin and joyfully narrated Thy deeds which they remembered.
cāṇūro mallavīrastadanu nṛpagirā muṣṭiko muṣṭiśālī
tvāṃ rāmaṃ cābhipede jhaṭajhaṭiti mitho muṣṭipātātirūkṣam |
utpātāpātanākarṣaṇavividharaṇānyāsatāṃ tatra citraṃ
mṛtyo: prāgeva mallaprabhuragamadayaṃ bhūriśo bandhamokṣān ||6||
cāṇūra: mallavīra:-	Chaanoora, the champion wrestler
tadanu nṛpa-girā	thereafter, at the king's command
muṣṭika: muṣṭiśālī	Mushtika, the boxer
tvāṃ rāmaṃ ca-abhipede	Thee and Balaraama attacked
jhaṭajhaṭiti mitha:	loudly and mutually
muṣṭi-pāta-ati-rūkṣam	with fists and blows fierce
utpāta-āpātana-ākarṣaṇa-	throwing up, pushing down and dragging
vividha-raṇāni-	(such) various methods of fight
āsatāṃ tatra citraṃ	which were there, what a wonder
mṛtyo: prāk-eva	even before death
mallaprabhu:-agamat-ayaṃ	this champion of wrestling attained
bhūriśa: bandha-mokṣān	many times bondage and release
At the king's command the champion wrestler Chaanoor and the boxer Mushtika attacked Thee and Balaraama. There were mutual and loud and fierce blows of fists, throwing up, pushing down and dragging and various such methods of fight were used. What a wonder it is that the leading wrestler Chaanoor, even before his death attained bondage and release many times at Thy hands.
hā dhik kaṣṭaṃ kumārau sulalitavapuṣau mallavīrau kaṭhorau
na drakṣyāmo vrajāmastvaritamiti jane bhāṣamāṇe tadānīm |
cāṇūraṃ taṃ karodbhrāmaṇavigaladasuṃ pothayāmāsithorvyāṃ
piṣṭo'bhūnmuṣṭiko'pi drutamatha halinā naṣṭaśiṣṭairdadhāve ||7||
hā dhik kaṣṭaṃ	alas! How bad!
kumārau sulalita-vapuṣau	the two boys, tender bodied
mallavīrau kaṭhorau	the (two) wrestlers are tough
na drakṣyāma:	(we will) not see (this fight)
vrajāma:-tvaritam-	will go away quickly
iti jane bhāṣamāṇe	thus when people were talking
tadānīm cāṇūraṃ taṃ	then that Chaanoor
kara-udbhrāmaṇa-	(who was) by hand whirled around (by Thee)
vigalat-asuṃ	(and so) whose life slipped away (he died)
pothayāmāsitha-urvyāṃ	(Thou) threw him on the earth
piṣṭa:-abhūt-muṣṭika:-api	crushed was Mushtika also
drutam-atha halinā	quickly then by Balaraama
naṣṭa-śiṣṭai:-dadhāve	other than the (two) killed ran away
Alas! How bad! The two boys are tender bodied and the two wrestlers are tough. We will go away quickly and not see this unequal contest,' thus the people were talking among themselves. Just then Thou caught hold of Chaanoor's arm and whirled him round and round and threw him dead on the ground. Mushtika was also quickly crushed to death by Balaraama. The remaining wrestlers ran away out of fear.
kaṃsa saṃvārya tūryaṃ khalamatiravidan kāryamāryān pitṛṃstā-
nāhantuṃ vyāptamūrtestava ca samaśiṣaddūramutsāraṇāya |
ruṣṭo duṣṭoktibhistvaṃ garuḍa iva giriṃ mañcamañcannudañcat-
khaḍgavyāvalgadussaṃgrahamapi ca haṭhāt prāgrahīraugrasenim ||8||
kaṃsa saṃvārya tūryaṃ	Kansa, stopping the drums
khala-mati:-avidan	(he) the wicked not knowing
kāryam-	what to do
āryān-pitṝn-tān-āhantuṃ	those respected parents to be killed
vyāptamūrte:-tava	O Omniscient Lord! Thine (the parents)
ca samaśiṣat-	and ordered
dūram-utsāraṇāya	to drive far away
ruṣṭa: duṣṭa-uktibhi: -tvaṃ	annoyed by wicked words Thou
garuḍa:-iva giriṃ	like Garuda flying to (the top of a ) mountain
mañcam-añcan-	jumping to the throne (of Kansa)
udañcat-khaḍga-vyāvalga-	raised up sword brandishing
dussaṃgraham-api	(so) difficult to catch hold of (such Kansa)
ca haṭhāt prāgrahī:-	with determination (Thou) caught hold of
augrasenim	that son of Ugrasena
Kansa asked for the drums to be stopped. Then the wicked one not knowing what to do ordered for Thy respected parents to be killed. O Omnipresent Lord! He also ordered that Thou be driven away to a remote place. Thou were very annoyed at his wicked words. Thou leaped with determination to the throne of Kansa to the highest balcony of his palace, like a Garuda ascends to the top of the mountain, and gripped him, the son of Ugrasena, though he was difficult to catch hold of because he resisted with brandishing a sword.
sadyo niṣpiṣṭasandhiṃ bhuvi narapatimāpātya tasyopariṣṭā-
ttvayyāpātye tadaiva tvadupari patitā nākināṃ puṣpavṛṣṭi: |
kiṃ kiṃ brūmastadānīṃ satatamapi bhiyā tvadgatātmā sa bheje
sāyujyaṃ tvadvadhotthā parama paramiyaṃ vāsanā kālaneme: ||9||
sadya: niṣpiṣṭa-sandhiṃ	immediately crushing his joints
bhuvi narapatim-āpātya	on the ground the king hurling
tasya-upariṣṭāt-	on top of him
tvayi-āpātye tadā-eva	Thou falling at that very moment
tvat-upari patitā	on Thee fell
nākināṃ puṣpa vṛṣṭi:	from the gods, shower of flowers
kiṃ kiṃ brūma:-tadānīṃ	what all should I say, at that time
satatam-api bhiyā	always out of fear
tvat-gata-ātmā sa bheje	thinking of you he attained
sāyujyaṃ tvat-vadha-utthā	union with Thee, arising from Thee killing him
parama parama-iyaṃ	O Supreme Being! This alone
vāsanā kālaneme:	was the vaasanaa (past life's tendency), of Kaalanemi
Immediately crushing his joints Thou hurled the king on the ground and jumped on his body. At that very moment the gods in heaven showered flowers on Thee. What shall I say! O Supreme Being! Though Kansa always remembered Thee out of fear, he attained union with Thee as a result of Thou killing him. This was due to his vaasanaa (past life's tendency) as Kaalanemi (in his previous birth) who was killed by Thee.
tadbhrātṛnaṣṭa piṣṭvā drutamatha pitarau sannamannugrasenaṃ
kṛtvā rājānamuccairyadukulamakhilaṃ modayan kāmadānai: |
bhaktānāmuttamaṃ coddhavamamaragurorāptanītiṃ sakhāyaṃ
labdhvā tuṣṭo nagaryāṃ pavanapurapate rundhi me sarvarogān ||10||
tat-bhrātṛn-aṣṭa piṣṭvā	his eight brothers killing
drutam-atha	quickly then
pitarau sannaman-	prostrating before the parents
ugrasenaṃ kṛtvā rājānam-	Ugrasena making the king
uccai:-yadukulam-akhilaṃ	greatly the whole of the Yaadava clan
modayan kāmadānai:	making happy by giving what they desired
bhaktānām-uttamaṃ	and the greatest of devotees
ca-uddhavam-	Uddhava
amaraguro:-āpta-nītiṃ	who had received the ethics from the preceptors of gods (Brahaspati)
sakhāyaṃ labdhvā	getting as friend
tuṣṭa: nagaryāṃ	satisfied (resided) in the capital city
pavanapurapate	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
rundhi me sarva-rogān	remove my all afflictions
Quickly then Thou killed Kansa's eight brothers. Prostrating before Thy parents, Thou made Ugrasena the king and made the whole Yaadava clan greatly happy by giving them what they desired. Thou then got Uddhava as friend who was the greatest of devotees and had received instructions into the laws of ethics from the preceptor of gods, Brihaspati. Thou resided in the capital with satisfaction. O Lord of Guruvaayur! deign to remove all my afflictions.